# DNA_Agglomerative_Clustering

Summary: A java project that gets in DNA sequences as input and a stopping rule and linkage type (simple,complete,average) and results a dendrogram drawn using javaFx and pgma results and clusters.


This project consists of 2 main parts:

1)	A Wagner-Fischer object, which when given a DNA XML file can give the Edit Distance matrix between them through one of it methods: getEditDistance(). This part was originally very simple to implement by following the Algorithm presented in the course lecture. Through calculating the edit distance between every two dna sequence we can get the edit distance matrix. To calculate the edit distance between each sequence we first created a 2d array to be filled with the appropriate values following the operation (update, delete, insert) with the least cost. Since DNA nucleotide bases have 4 different possibilities: A, C, G, and T, the implementa-tion was ought to be first forward [2]. However, this was not the whole case, for there was another possible bases (R, Y, K, M, S, W, B, D, H, V, and N) each having a probability of being 2, 3, or even 4 different nucleo-tides. Although this concept won’t affect the delete or insert operations which will keep having a weight of 1, the update will be introduced to different “layers” of weight between 0 and 1. This means that updating from an uncertain nucleotide to another might will cost less than the 1 when both of them might have the probability of harbouring the same basic nucleotide base (ex: updating from “W” to “B” will cost 5/6 since both of them can be the T nucleotide).It is calculated by going through all the cases in the first nucleotide, comparing them with with each case in the second nucleotide (add 1 if they are different and 0 if they are the same) and then dividing the weight by the product of the size of the 2 nucleotides to obtain the final weight. Taking into consideration the new update concept and computing its different weights (by utilizing the compare method in the nucleotide helper class), we could fill the 2d array and the edit distance was the last value in the bottom right. The similarity matrix was also easily obtained from the distance matric through the formula similarity = 1/(1+ED). This identity similarity matrix was used after that in obtaing the clusters.

2)	 The second part of this project was to use the similarity matrix in the agglomerative clustering. This was done the the method AgglomerativeClustering() which takes an arraylist of the simple initial clusters where each dna sequence is a cluster itself. This method also takes into consideration the stopping rule if specified and the type of linkage to be used in clustering (single link, complete link, average link). This method then traverses through this arraylist and when it finds the maximum similarity and highest than the stopping rule it combines these two clusters in a parent cluster. After that these two child clusters are removed from the arraylist and the parent cluster is added. This pattern keeps on repeating until there is no similarity be-tween the clusters in the arraylist that is greater than the stopping rule or there is only one remaining cluster in the arraylist if there is no stopping rule. This method also generates the PGMA (per group method aver-age) for each cluster by calculating the average of similarities between the sequences found in each cluster. 
